---
layout: base
title:  'Working Group on UD v3'
udver: '2'
---

# Working Group on v3 Guidelines

As of now, there is no plan and no fixed date for the next version of the UD
guidelines. However, it is likely that there will be a version 3 at some point
in the future. This is the place where suggestions for later discussion are
collected.

* Relations / coordination: The recurring issue of right-headed [conj]() relations
  in verb-final languages. See e.g. [Issue 356](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/docs/issues/356)
  about Japanese.
* Relations: There are opinions that the special treatment of copula ([cop]()) in UD has introduced more problems than it has solved. Should we abandon it?
* Relations: We distinguish between dependents of clauses (e.g., [obl]())
  and parts of nominal phrases (e.g., [nmod]()). Do we also want to have a
  third complete set of dependents that modify modifier words such as adjectives
  and adverbs?
* Relations: what to do with [acl]() and [acl:relcl]() that modifies a verb?
  See [this issue](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/UD_French-GSD/issues/4#issuecomment-399712521).
* Relations (asked by Slavo in the UD mailing list on 2019-01-22):
  is there a good reason why we treat coordination between clauses and coordination
  between non-clauses as the same structure?
  It might just be my bias talking, but a strong distinction between
  clauses and non-clauses seems to underlie the whole UD system of
  relations, so it is weird that it's not applied here. Same, by the
  way, goes for parataxis.
* Relations: [the current guidelines for syntax](https://universaldependencies.org/u/overview/syntax.html#function-word-modifiers)
  forbid dependents of [case]() nodes while they are slightly more benevolent with [mark]() nodes.
  [Issue 618](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/docs/issues/618) has raised valid points against both.
  We may want to allow adverbial modifiers ([advmod]() and [obl]()) of `case` as well.
  And in any case, we need to explain the guidelines better.
* Features: At present, causative is a [Voice](). However, in some languages
  (Turkish?) it is orthogonal to other voices. Thus we have plain active, plain
  passive, causative active and causative passive. Should we make the causative
  an independent boolean feature instead? `Causative=Yes`?
* New feature: [NounClass](), values `Bantu1` to `Bantu23` and potentially other families in the future.
* New feature: [Clusivity](), values `In`, `Ex`.
* New feature: [Obviation](), values `Prx`, `Obv`.
* New feature: [Typo](), value `Yes`.
